README.md, before:

# THIS REPO IS NOW OBSOLETE

As of Feb 8, 2019, Proton is now version 5.0, incorporating Wine 5.0 changes. The strftime() changes have been completed as of Wine 5.0. Therefore, vanilla Proton will now support these changes and this repository is no longer necessary.

-----

##### [Original Proton README](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/README.md)

# What is this?

This is a custom build of Proton to fix some issues I found with ESO.
Specifically, if any ESO AddOns use os.date() with any of many substitions that
are unimplemented by Wine, the result will be nil -- an unexpected outcome for
any AddOn. This causes any AddOns that uses these substitutions to crash,
resulting in unexpected behaviour.

I submitted a patch to WineHQ (Bug #[47809](https://bugs.winehq.org/show_bug.cgi?id=47809)) with a fix for these issues,
but due to the politics of Wine development, they are probably unlikely to make
it upstream. So, I opted instead to apply my patch to Proton.

This repository's releases contains a build of Proton 4.11 with my patch and
upstream patches applied.

-----

# The Easy Way: Install Into Steam

Using this method to install Proton is, by far, the easiest method providing
that you have ESO installed in Steam.

**NOTE:** I do not have ESO installed with Steam, so if my instructions are not
clear or are incorrect, please let me know.

1. Create the custom Proton directory (if it doesn't exist): `mkdir ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d/`
2. Download [proton-strftime.tar.xz](https://github.com/chuck-r/proton-strftime/releases/latest/download/proton-strftime.tar.xz) and extract the whole folder inside into ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d

   Once completed, you should have a folder structure like this:
   <pre>
        ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d/
        |
        |__ proton-[version]-strftime/
        |   |
        |   |__ compatibilitytool.vdf
        |   |__ dist/
        |   |__ dist.lock
        |   |__ filelock.py
        |   |__ LICENSE
        |   |__ proton
        |   |__ proton_3.7_tracked_files
        |   |__ toolmanifest.vdf
        |   |__ user_settings.sample.py
        |   |__ version
        |
        |__ (possibly other custom Proton versions)
   </pre>

3. Restart the Steam client
4. Right-click 'The Elder Scrolls Online' in your game library and open `Properties...`
5. In the General tab, click the checkbox that says "Force the use of a specific Steam Play compatibility tool"
6. From the drop-down menu select "proton-4.11-12-strftime"
7. Run the game, and enjoy!

-----

# The Easy Way: Without Steam

I have provided a [script](https://chuck-r.github.io/proton-strftime/RunESO.sh) in the `extra` folder in this repository. It automates the process of
downloading proton-strftime, seting up a prefix, running the game, and updating
proton-strftime. Download the script from the link, save it, and make it
executable by issuing the following command:

    chmod +x /path/to/downloaded/RunESO.sh

### Setup: Automated Proton setup and ESO Installation

To setup the ESO Proton folder and automatically install ESO use the following
command:

    ./RunESO.sh install

This assumes that your ESO Installer (Install\_ESO.exe) is in
~/Downloads/Install_ESO.exe. If it is not, use the alternative command:

    ./RunESO.sh install /path/to/Install_ESO.exe

By default, this installs Proton and ESO into the ~/.eso folder. To change
this, modify the `eso_path` variable at the top of the script.

### Setup: Automated Proton setup only

This use case is useful if you already have the game installed in Wine or the
game data files in another location. The basic steps are:

1. Run `./RunESO.sh install --prefix-only`
2. Edit the `game_dir` variable at the top of the script to point to the path of your game data files (usually something like /some/wine/prefix/drive_c/Program Files (x86)/Zenimax Online)

The folder that `game_dir` points to should have a structure like this:

    game_dir
    |
    |__ Launcher
    |   |__ Bethesda.net_Launcher.exe
    |
    |__ The Elder Scrolls Online
    |   |__ game
    |       |__ client
    |           |__ eso64.exe
    |
    |__ uninstall
    |__ ZosSteamStarter.version


### Running the game

Afterwards, to run the launcher you can use the command:

    ./RunESO.sh

To skip the launcher you can use

    ./RunESO.sh game

### Updating proton-strftime

To update proton-strftime to the latest version, use the following command:

    ./RunESO.sh update

-----

# The hard way: Run ESO from Proton directly (manual setup)

If, like me, you haven't purchased ESO from Steam, then you have to set up Proton to run ESO outside of Wine. This
is a little difficult to understand (even from a seasoned Wine user's perspective), so I'm going to provide my own
scripts and methods for running ESO outside of Steam.

### 1. Create a Proton directory for ESO
In my case, I created a directory called ~/.eso. Make the directory and cd into it.

    mkdir ~/.eso
    cd ~/.eso

### 2. Extract proton-strftime to ~/.eso
Extract the folder from [proton-strftime.tar.xz](https://github.com/chuck-r/proton-strftime/releases/latest/download/proton-strftime.tar.xz) to ~/.eso using your favorite archive manager.

For ease of future updates, create a symlink for ~/.eso/proton to ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime

    ln -s ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime ~/.eso/proton

This way, you can keep multiple Proton versions in the folder and swap between them by simply changing where the symlink
points.

### 3. Copy the Proton prefix

    cp -R ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime/dist/share/default_pfx ~/.eso/pfx

### 4. Install ESO

    STEAM_COMPAT_DATA_PATH=~/.eso ~/.eso/proton/proton waitforexitandrun /path/to/Install_ESO.exe

### 5. Run manually or with the script
The command line I use to run ESO manually:

    STEAM_COMPAT_DATA_PATH=~/.eso PROTON_NO_ESYNC=1 mesa_glthread=true vblank_mode=0 ~/.eso/proton/proton waitforexitandrun "$HOME/.eso/pfx/drive_c/Program Files (x86)/Zenimax Online/launcher/Bethesda.net_Launcher.exe"

I have also provided a [script](https://chuck-r.github.io/proton-strftime/RunESO.sh) in the `extra` folder that can be customized to most use cases. Once the variables at the top of the script are set to your needs, run:

    ./RunESO.sh

or

    ./RunESO.sh game

Commit message:

Proton 5.0 released, this version is no longer necessary.

README.md, after:

# THIS REPO IS NOW OBSOLETE

As of Feb 8, 2019, Proton is now version 5.0, incorporating Wine 5.0 changes. The strftime() changes have been completed as of Wine 5.0. Therefore, vanilla Proton will now support these changes and this repository is no longer necessary.

I will still keep Proton-4.11-12-strftime here, but it will only be available in the proton-4.11-strftime-archive branch. This is to discourage future use of proton-strftime, since a better alternative -- Proton 5.0 -- is available.

-----

##### [Original Proton README](https://github.com/ValveSoftware/Proton/README.md)

# What is this?

This is a custom build of Proton to fix some issues I found with ESO.
Specifically, if any ESO AddOns use os.date() with any of many substitions that
are unimplemented by Wine, the result will be nil -- an unexpected outcome for
any AddOn. This causes any AddOns that uses these substitutions to crash,
resulting in unexpected behaviour.

I submitted a patch to WineHQ (Bug #[47809](https://bugs.winehq.org/show_bug.cgi?id=47809)) with a fix for these issues,
but due to the politics of Wine development, they are probably unlikely to make
it upstream. So, I opted instead to apply my patch to Proton.

This repository's releases contains a build of Proton 4.11 with my patch and
upstream patches applied.

-----

# The Easy Way: Install Into Steam

Using this method to install Proton is, by far, the easiest method providing
that you have ESO installed in Steam.

**NOTE:** I do not have ESO installed with Steam, so if my instructions are not
clear or are incorrect, please let me know.

1. Create the custom Proton directory (if it doesn't exist): `mkdir ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d/`
2. Download [proton-strftime.tar.xz](https://github.com/chuck-r/proton-strftime/releases/latest/download/proton-strftime.tar.xz) and extract the whole folder inside into ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d

   Once completed, you should have a folder structure like this:
   <pre>
        ~/.steam/root/compatibilitytools.d/
        |
        |__ proton-[version]-strftime/
        |   |
        |   |__ compatibilitytool.vdf
        |   |__ dist/
        |   |__ dist.lock
        |   |__ filelock.py
        |   |__ LICENSE
        |   |__ proton
        |   |__ proton_3.7_tracked_files
        |   |__ toolmanifest.vdf
        |   |__ user_settings.sample.py
        |   |__ version
        |
        |__ (possibly other custom Proton versions)
   </pre>

3. Restart the Steam client
4. Right-click 'The Elder Scrolls Online' in your game library and open `Properties...`
5. In the General tab, click the checkbox that says "Force the use of a specific Steam Play compatibility tool"
6. From the drop-down menu select "proton-4.11-12-strftime"
7. Run the game, and enjoy!

-----

# The Easy Way: Without Steam

I have provided a [script](https://chuck-r.github.io/proton-strftime/RunESO.sh) in the `extra` folder in this repository. It automates the process of
downloading proton-strftime, seting up a prefix, running the game, and updating
proton-strftime. Download the script from the link, save it, and make it
executable by issuing the following command:

    chmod +x /path/to/downloaded/RunESO.sh

### Setup: Automated Proton setup and ESO Installation

To setup the ESO Proton folder and automatically install ESO use the following
command:

    ./RunESO.sh install

This assumes that your ESO Installer (Install\_ESO.exe) is in
~/Downloads/Install_ESO.exe. If it is not, use the alternative command:

    ./RunESO.sh install /path/to/Install_ESO.exe

By default, this installs Proton and ESO into the ~/.eso folder. To change
this, modify the `eso_path` variable at the top of the script.

### Setup: Automated Proton setup only

This use case is useful if you already have the game installed in Wine or the
game data files in another location. The basic steps are:

1. Run `./RunESO.sh install --prefix-only`
2. Edit the `game_dir` variable at the top of the script to point to the path of your game data files (usually something like /some/wine/prefix/drive_c/Program Files (x86)/Zenimax Online)

The folder that `game_dir` points to should have a structure like this:

    game_dir
    |
    |__ Launcher
    |   |__ Bethesda.net_Launcher.exe
    |
    |__ The Elder Scrolls Online
    |   |__ game
    |       |__ client
    |           |__ eso64.exe
    |
    |__ uninstall
    |__ ZosSteamStarter.version


### Running the game

Afterwards, to run the launcher you can use the command:

    ./RunESO.sh

To skip the launcher you can use

    ./RunESO.sh game

### Updating proton-strftime

To update proton-strftime to the latest version, use the following command:

    ./RunESO.sh update

-----

# The hard way: Run ESO from Proton directly (manual setup)

If, like me, you haven't purchased ESO from Steam, then you have to set up Proton to run ESO outside of Wine. This
is a little difficult to understand (even from a seasoned Wine user's perspective), so I'm going to provide my own
scripts and methods for running ESO outside of Steam.

### 1. Create a Proton directory for ESO
In my case, I created a directory called ~/.eso. Make the directory and cd into it.

    mkdir ~/.eso
    cd ~/.eso

### 2. Extract proton-strftime to ~/.eso
Extract the folder from [proton-strftime.tar.xz](https://github.com/chuck-r/proton-strftime/releases/latest/download/proton-strftime.tar.xz) to ~/.eso using your favorite archive manager.

For ease of future updates, create a symlink for ~/.eso/proton to ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime

    ln -s ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime ~/.eso/proton

This way, you can keep multiple Proton versions in the folder and swap between them by simply changing where the symlink
points.

### 3. Copy the Proton prefix

    cp -R ~/.eso/proton-4.11-12-strftime/dist/share/default_pfx ~/.eso/pfx

### 4. Install ESO

    STEAM_COMPAT_DATA_PATH=~/.eso ~/.eso/proton/proton waitforexitandrun /path/to/Install_ESO.exe

### 5. Run manually or with the script
The command line I use to run ESO manually:

    STEAM_COMPAT_DATA_PATH=~/.eso PROTON_NO_ESYNC=1 mesa_glthread=true vblank_mode=0 ~/.eso/proton/proton waitforexitandrun "$HOME/.eso/pfx/drive_c/Program Files (x86)/Zenimax Online/launcher/Bethesda.net_Launcher.exe"

I have also provided a [script](https://chuck-r.github.io/proton-strftime/RunESO.sh) in the `extra` folder that can be customized to most use cases. Once the variables at the top of the script are set to your needs, run:

    ./RunESO.sh

or

    ./RunESO.sh game
